# aphid_lb_community
Study of influence of light and temperature on insect community dynamics and underlying behavioral mechanisms.

Study completed by authors: Colleen R. Miller, Maren N. Vitousek, Jennifer S. Thaler


Natural variation in light has historically correlated with seasonality, providing an honest cue to organisms with seasonal life history cycles. Many organisms, such as photosensitive insects, use light as a proxy for season because it is a more reliable cue than temperature. However, with the onset of widespread artificial light at night (ALAN), light is no longer a reliable phenological cue or daily cue, making its presence or intensity potentially clash with temperature trends. These clashing cues may influence not only individual behaviors, but trophic networks. However, there have been few studies that connect behavioral underpinnings and larger trophic- and community-level processes, resulting in a knowledge gap bridging individual, population and community-level responses to mismatched cues. We experimentally investigated impacts of cool temperature and constant light on a lady beetle-aphid-fava plant system to ask 1) how do temperature and light impact aphid population growth in the presence of predators? and 2) what are the behaviors underlying the impacts of temperature and light on the predator-prey interaction? We used Coccinella septempunctata and Coleomegilla maculata lady beetles to understand the potential interaction of the environment and visual predation on pea aphid (Acyrthosiphon pisum) population dynamics in varied conditions. First, we looked at the net effects of ALAN on aphid population growth by manipulating temperature and light cycles of our tri-trophic interaction over a ten-day period. To disentangle the mechanisms driving observed population patterns, we then investigated direct effects of treatments on predator feeding behavior, aphid predator evasion tactics, aphid population dynamics and plant growth. Aphids maintained high growth rates in cooler treatments, a potential impact of negative density-dependent growth. Aphids and their lady beetle predators reacted differently to variation in light and temperature: we observed evidence of prey-driven food web impacts as aphids excelled in cool, light conditions, and we observed top-down control of aphids by increased lady beetle predatory success in warm environments. Overall, we found that ALAN has multidirectional effects which vary in prevalence under different temperature regimes on this common insect community. This knowledge may impact how scientists manage common insect pests under the brightening night sky.
